From Ancient Greece to modern titles today, fate, it seems, always has its hand in the outcomes of people’s lives. In The Tragical History of the Life and Death of Doctor Faustus  by Christopher Marlowe, Faustus too grapples with fate and free will. After he makes a deal with the devil, his life starts to spiral downwards, in a whirlpool of unkind fate. In this play, Faustus has no free will, he is simply subject to whatever fate gives him. He constantly alleges that he has no control over his life. He and the Chorus refer to pre-Christian ideas of fate over the Christian ideas of free will, in accordance with the anti-church sentiment at the time. And finally, his bad fortune is discussed much by the Chorus, putting the blame not on his choices, but on Fate itself.
In this play, Faustus constantly refers to how he has no control over his life. He feels that rather than being in control of himself and his life, as Christianity might tell him is correct, he instead is reliant on simple fate - good or bad luck - to steer him through his life. Faustus stated that “Thy fatal time doth draw to final end;” (Marlowe, Page 62, Line 64), which is a double meaning. First, it means that his time of death draws ever closer, which may be inferred from his general state of affairs. However, the second meaning is much more important. The origin of the word “fatal” is the old French word “fatal”, meaning “decreed by fate,” or “fraught with fate.” What Faustus is actually saying with this quote is that “Fate decrees that I will come to an end.” Not simply his bad choices leading to death, but Fate itself forcing this upon him. If Faustus would have had free will, he would not decree it be “fatal time” which draws to an end, it would instead be his own time that draws to an end. The transfer of ownership of time is an important distinction that specifically makes it so that he does not control his own time, but rather rides the waves that Fate creates. Another instance of Faustus blaming Fate instead of himself is when he says “You stars that reigned at my nativity/Whose influence hath allotted death and hell,” (Marlowe, Page 74, Line 118). First, he says “You stars,” referring to God or gods above him, referencing more of a pagan or Greek idea of divinity then the Christian one of his time. Fate is much more important then choice in Greek mythology, which leads into the next part, where he says “influence hath allotted.” Not “influenced me to do something” or “influenced my choices,” but “influenced hath allotted.” By saying “allotted,” he is remarking that this was the will of “You stars,” and that it would come to pass, no matter his own choices or actions. The “death and hell” were not optional, they were very specifically allotted to him by some higher power, and he could not have escaped it even if he had tried. This is also shown when he says “What will be, shall be? Divinity, adieu!” (Marlowe, Page 12, Line 62).  He essentially just gives up, stating that whatever will happen will just happen, not much you can do about it. This mostly just reinforces the idea from the previous two quotes, the idea that Fate is the determining factor in Fautus’s life, not himself.
Faustus also refers to pre-Christian ideas of fate over the Christian ideas of free will. This is demonstrated partially in the second quote, but is clearly stated when he says “For he confounds hell in Elysium/His ghost be with the old philosophers!” (Marlowe, Page 24, Line 78). Elysium is not a Christian place or idea, instead, it is the heavenly part of Hades, or the underworld, in Greek mythology. This was the place that the most revered and honorable would to after they had died; it was a place of luxury and paradise. He next backs this reference up by saying “with the old philosophers,” referring to the Ancient Greek philosophers such as Aristotle, Plato, and Socrates. This reference highlights the rejection of Christian ideas at the time; by talking about Elysium and the “old philosophers” Faustus is showing that those ideas, and the ideas of Fate, might still be true, and that the current Christian ideas might not be. Faustus’ real reference to the pre-Christian idea of Fate is when he says “Short’ning my days and thread of vital life,” (Marlowe, Page 60, Line 3). In this quote, Faustus specifically talks about the “thread of vital life,” which directly refers to the concept of the Fates in Ancient Greek mythology, where the three Fates spin the loom of life, with each person represented by a thread. In this idea of Fate and Fates, people have no free will and ultimately are controlled by the Fates, who decide what to do with each thread, and when to eventually cut it, ending that person’s life. Faustus talks about the “thread of vital life” because he knows that he has no free will, and that nothing could change his predetermined fate. This contrasts quite heavily with the more Christian ideas that you alone decide your fate, and that people do have free will. Overall, this is a rejection of the more normal Christian ideas of the time and a reference to the older ideas of Fate.
The Chorus, a sort of narrator or voice of the author, also makes several references to him having a bad fortune. Very early in the play, the Chorus says “The form of Faustus' fortunes, good or bad:” (Marlowe, Page 7, Line 8). The Chorus is very clear in this statement: Faustus has fortunes, not choices. If the Chorus were to have declared Faustus to have choices, it would have said “The form of Faustus' choices, good or bad:”. But it didn’t, and in this omission of “choices” and the addition of “fortunes,” the Chorus is clearly saying that Faustus’ life events are not because of his own free will, they are because of his good or bad fortunes, predetermined by some higher power. Then, on the very last page of the play, the Chorus once again refers to the fortune of Faustus by saying “Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise” (Marlowe, Page 76, Line 5). This quote talks about Faustus’ bad fortune, once more directly saying that Faustus had fortunes, not choices, and that he would have ended up this way regardless of how he tried to act. Now, this quote also tries to warn or “exhort” “the wise” to be wary of this unfortunate path, which might lead to the idea that he could have controlled this. However, this simply is just the Chorus being hyperbolic, as the word “exhort” has a very strong connotation, much more so then the word “warn” or “urge.” Just as the Chorus said at the beginning, this was his fate, not his will.
The lesson to keep in mind is that in Doctor Faustus, free will is not a significant factor in the story of Faustus’ life. Only his fortunes, his good or bad luck, predetermined by some higher power, truly matter in the overall storyline. Not only that, but just as Protestant revolution had challenged the ideas of the Catholic church, Faustus challenges the ideas of Christianity as a whole, reverting at times to more Ancient Greek ideas of life and Fate, specifically the idea that there are threads of fate, each one controlling the outcome of a person’s life. To suggest that the current ideas of Christanity were incorrect would have been blasphemy at the time, but the ideas are still hidden away in this play. Also the Chorus, the sort of narrator or voice of the author who explains things to the reader or audience, agrees with the ideas of fortune, referring two it once at the beginning of the play, and once at the end. All put together, Doctor Faustus is not a play about a series of bad decisions and their consequences, but about cruel higher powers decreeing the fate of mortals.
